********************************************************
Day 15: Tuesday, February 28, 2017 - Thinking about Bots
********************************************************


Project Bots
============

The project portion of this class will be:

- Make 2 bots by Thursday, March 23.

These bots can connect to a service like Twitter or Reddit to publish (i.e. another API). Or, basically be a "web application". They don't really have to run online if you don't want the hassle...usually you want to see them up-and-running after all the trouble you've gone through -- we'll worry about those details in the last week.


Assignments
===========


The following assignments are warmups to making bots:



- :doc:`/syllabus/assignments/homework/local-quake-bot`
- :doc:`/syllabus/assignments/homework/nyt-sans-trump`
- :doc:`/syllabus/assignments/homework/bot-brainstorm`



If you didn't get the email on how to log in to AWS (with credentials), let me know. Otherwise, here is the guide:

- :doc:`/guide/topics/aws/intro-to-aws-boto3`





Why Bot?
========

I use "bot" as a general term for "something that does boring work for us".

One of the best examples is Quakebot from the LA Times:

- How to Break News While You Sleep: https://source.opennews.org/articles/how-break-news-while-you-sleep/
- Quakebots and Pageview Quotas: Bot or Be Botted? https://source.opennews.org/articles/bot-or-be-botted/
- How a California Earthquake Becomes the News: An Extremely Precise Timeline https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/03/how-a-california-earthquake-becomes-the-news-an-extremely-precise-timeline/284506/


In "How to Break News While You Sleep", Ken Schwenke describes how he wrote a program to do what he had to do as a reporter: read an earthquake alert email, and turn it into a story.

This is what the earthquake email looks like:


.. code-block:: text

                    == PRELIMINARY EARTHQUAKE REPORT ==



    Region:                           GREATER LOS ANGELES AREA, CALIFORNIA
    Geographic coordinates:           34.133N, 118.487W
    Magnitude:                        4.7
    Depth:                            8 km
    Universal Time (UTC):             17 Mar 2014  13:25:36
    Time near the Epicenter:          17 Mar 2014  06:25:37
    Local standard time in your area: 17 Mar 2014  05:25:36

    Location with respect to nearby cities:
    9 km (5 mi) NNW of Westwood, California
    10 km (6 mi) NW of Beverly Hills, California
    12 km (7 mi) W of Universal City, California
    12 km (8 mi) N of Santa Monica, California
    562 km (348 mi) SSE of Sacramento, California


    ADDITIONAL EARTHQUAKE PARAMETERS
    ________________________________
    event ID                     :  ci 15476961



The goal is to make a story faster than everyone else. But that doesn't mean you have to make a robot that writes the story, beginning to end. Let the robot do as many of the tedious steps needed before a story is produced, and handoff something for a human editor to put the finishing touches on:


Here is an example of what the Quakebot produces, with emphasis showing the parts that are extracted literally from the text:



    Headline:
    Earthquake: **4.7** quake strikes near **Westwood, California**

    Body:

    A magnitude **4.7** earthquake was reported **early Monday morning at 5:25 AM**, **5 miles northwest** from **Westwood, California**, according to the U.S. Geological Survey.

    In the last 10 days, there have been no earthquakes of magnitude 3.0 or greater centered nearby.


    Notes to editor:

    This is a robopost from your friendly earthquake robot. Please copyedit & publish the story.

    The official USGS page for this earthquake event can be found here:

    http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eventpage/ci15476961

    If the city referenced in the headline is relatively unknown, but the earthquake occurred close to another, larger city, please alter the headline and body text to put that information first.

    I am currently not smart enough to make these decisions on my own, and rely on the help of intelligent humans such as yourselves.

    Thanks! Quakebot.



Don't ask what people want, ask what people do
----------------------------------------------


Cue possibly-apocryphal Henry Ford quote, “If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses.”

https://hbr.org/2011/08/henry-ford-never-said-the-fast


In the Quakebot example, focus on what the journalist wants: to produce an accurate story before anyone else.

And then, look at what the Quakebot program actually *does*: the menial steps needed to convert an email to something that can be quickly turned into a story:


- Checking email for USGS alerts
- Extracting the important parts
- Pre-write the headline and body
- Email this info to the editor on duty



Love sites
^^^^^^^^^^

What people want is to find **love** ("true love", or the various other kinds of love). But how do you write a program to solve that problem? What is love? As a great `human once reflected <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HEXWRTEbj1I>`_:

    I give you my love, but you don't care.

    So what is right? And what is wrong? Gimme a sign.


Tough problem, for human or bot. But entrepreneurial programmers and engineers have been able to make a fortune by asking: **What do people do for love""?


For OKCupid, the creators probably focused on this aspect of what *people do* for love:

https://theblog.okcupid.com/we-experiment-on-human-beings-5dd9fe280cd5#.3wlll6i8x

- Look around until you find attractive person
- Find out if person is single
- Ask that person dozens of questions to determine their politics, favorite foods, hobbies, love-of-life, etc.
- Consider whether that person's personality and interests match your own.
- Look around for another person.

For Tinder, they might have seen what *people do* as:

https://www.buzzfeed.com/alexkantrowitz/cracking-the-tinder-code-love-in-the-age-of-algorithms?utm_term=.tcoKX8K6L#.opAeRQeWa

- Go to bar
- Find attractive person
- Ask if attractive person is single
- Hope/pray they find you attractive
- Use pick-up line
- Find another bar

OK, so both services differ in what the "is the other person a match" phase. But crucially, they, and other dating services, solve these real-world time bottlenecks:

- Going to a bar or other place with people.
- Finding someone you're interested in.
- Finding out if said person is single and/or interested in any kind of relationship.












