*********************************
Day 1: Tuesday, January 10, 2017
*********************************

Today
=====

Introduction
------------

Expectations and technicalities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

What is text?
-------------

The Unix philosophy?
--------------------



What is journalism?
-------------------

Read a story from the Daily.


What is an algorithm?
---------------------

- Stanford admissions
- Google search rankings
-

Practicum
---------

Log on to the lab computers.


- Regular expressions
- The Atom Text Editor
- What's a tab key?


Next Class:
===========

Readings
--------

:doc:`/readings/fake-news`



Logistics
---------

Atom Text Editor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Install the Atom Text Editor
- Practice regexes
- Do a find-across the entire project
- Practice keyboarding

Google Chrome
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Install Google Chrome if you haven't already
- In Google Chrome, create a new user profile that is different from your default. `Share Chrome with others or add a profile <https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/2364824?co=GENIE.Platform%3DDesktop&hl=en>`
- In this new user profile, sign into your university webmail, i.e. `https://webmail.stanford.edu`
- In this new user profile, install the `Secure Shell plugin<https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/secure-shell/pnhechapfaindjhompbnflcldabbghjo?hl=en>`
- Practice keyboarding


Homework
--------

- Do some regexes


Expected knowledge
------------------

- Where your Tab key is.
- Regex: How to find text patterns that are at the beginning or end of the line.
- Regex: How to find repetitions of a pattern or word class.
- Regex: How to perform a find-and-replace with a capturing group.
- Atom: How to use regexes in the Find dialog.
- How to use keyboard shortcuts in Chrome to switch between tabs and windows.
